---
title: "Some Ideas on Ideology"
metaDesc: "Here's another short essay inspired by some ideas I've been having about the ethics of ideology."
date: "2023-03-16"
tags: 
 - philosophy
 - ethics
 - Nietzsche
 - ideology
---

Ideology, as a whole, is a discussion about morality and ethics, what is right and what is wrong. What is different between ideology and philosophy is that the former requires an objective justification for the conclusions therein drawn about morality whereas the latter adopts a more skeptical approach to objective claims and therefore elevates the importance of subjectivity. Thus arises the incompatibility between various ideologies and therefore the emergence of the idea of a “belief system.” It is in the flaw that these justifications are *not* objective that the phenomena of requiring “faith” emerges, for the very nature that various ideologies make valid claims with different conclusions means the morality itself is subjective. Regardless of this, however, the importance of the justifications has become rampant and, as is the case for many people, has become more important than the morality at the center of their respective ideology. Therefore, most people who identify themselves as Christian care more about whether or not you are a Christian than they do about whether or not you *live like one*. The former has generated contempt and violence, the latter tolerance and compassion. This conflation of ideology with the objective justifications invented to explain the “correctness” of their conclusions underlies the reason why the justifications themselves have become more important to many people. This reason is due to the topic of their focus, that is, what happens after death. 
	
Many moral justifications are hinged upon what happens to one’s body and one’s soul after they die as a consequence of the various actions taken in their life. For the moment I want to discuss what decadence is. Humans are naturally decadent, we are born with impulses and cravings for pleasure. An expression of this idea is paralleled in Christianity with the idea of sin. Therefore, so-called legitimate moral frameworks are considered important when they offer the inquisitor a path away from decadence. Acknowledgement and repentance is centerfold in Christianity, followed, of course, by salvation if one has called themselves a Christian. Another example is the Platonic philosophy as demonstrated by Socrates. He believed in “rationality at all costs.” Through reason, we can rise above our innate decadence and become “like God.” Again, notice the parallels in this idea with the ethics of Christianity. However, in *Twilight of the Idols*, whose subject follows closely to the discussion here, by Friedrich Nietzsche, the flaw of this approach is realized in a compelling way. To escape one’s decadence, one must “make war with it” in such a way that it is never ending. This idea exists in Christianity with repentance, one must never stop repenting, but an end is offered through salvation. Socrates believed death itself was an end. Is this never ending war not simply a form of decadence in and of itself? Are these moral frameworks not simply replacing one form of decadence with another? “Altering its expression,” as Nietzsche says. “To have to fight the instincts—that is the formula for decadence.” The consequence of this dichotomy of the never-ending war with the ending offered by salvation births a new, more concerning, idea that is central to ideology: That the purpose of life is to die. That “life after death” is more desirable than the life one lives now. The man who saw after the execution of Socrates says as he dies “death is the only doctor here… Socrates himself has just been sick for a long time…” The cure to decadence is death, not the battle. Salvation is the cure to sin, not repentance. This is a nuance not immediately apparent in ideological structures. Ultimately, it is *life-denying*. Ultimately, your body *does not matter*, for your salvation, that is, the very removal of this body, is why you should behave as you do.

The cure is in the idea that salvation is not something reached once you die, but rather a mentality you obtain when you live “the good life.” Repentance is not a means to an end, but rather a process that is unending. The constant acknowledgement of one’s decadence and motion towards a better life is a process that shall be unending in essence (for even the idea of the good life, a subjective construct, should change as one moves through his or her life). This, I suppose, is why it’s so difficult. This, I suppose further, is why objective justifications are needed to convince most that it is the right way to approach life. Nietzsche concludes this section by stating “as long as life is ascending, happiness is the same as instinct.” Thus, the battle is taken so as to configure oneself to be of the mentality of ascension, that is, analogously, to live the good life. Should one’s idea of a good life change, there should correspond a continuation of the battle. For, to have the instinct be equivalent to the good life is to achieve the happiness Nietzsche discusses here. It is not an ultimate end, and it may not even occur at the end of one’s life. Instead, it is a mindset that may come and may go, but to seek it is to follow through this process that mirrors that of repentance and to reap the salvation that is the happiness that results. Nothing here requires an objective justification, in fact, the subjective nature of the good life is precisely why one should have to continue to battle. To act in any way so as to prefer death — that is true decadence.

So, we arrive at a new position, different from that of Nietzsche. The never ending battle is no new form of decadence in the same way that a man continuing to fight for food through starvation is no new form of decadence. The man fighting through starvation only because he believes he will soon have more food than he's ever seen in his life, now this is decadence. To seek salvation is to be decadent, to repent is to live.